Symmetry operation specifications in Jones faithful notation (defined by PCRE) (#464)
Materials-Consortia/OPTIMADE: optimade.rst

This means that the structures entry has a relationship with the calculations entry of that ID.

    **Note**: formulating queries on relationships with entries that have specific property values is a multi-step process.

>     For example, to find all structures with bibliographic references where one of the authors has the last name "Schmidt" is performed by the following two steps:

Author: The spilling checker complained about "Schmit"... "Schmidt" is the more usual German spelling, AFAIK. But probably, indeed, both ways are OK. Could you please check frequencies on the Web and revert if the previous spelling is widely attested?

>     For example, to find all structures with bibliographic references where one of the authors has the last name "Schmidt" is performed by the following two steps:

Reviewer: "Schmidt" has 388,000,000 hits, "Schmit" 6,080,000.

I opened a separate PR which, among other minor changes, also includes typo and wording fixes from this branch (PR  #478). I also made the last name change there in case people would like to contest it.

  - :val:`[[4.0,0.0,0.0],[0.0,4.0,0.0],[0.0,1.0,4.0]]` represents a cell, where the first vector is :val:`(4, 0, 0)`, i.e., a vector aligned along the :val:`x` axis of length 4 Å; the second vector is :val:`(0, 4, 0)`; and the third vector is :val:`(0, 1, 4)`.

space\_group\_symmetry\_operation\_xyz
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

- **Description**: a list of symmetry operations given as general position x, y and z coordinates in algebraic form.
  Each symmetry operation is described by a string that gives that symmetry operation in Jones' faithful representation (Bradley & Cracknell, 1972: pp. 35-37), adapted for computer string notation.
  The letters :val:`x`, :val:`y` and :val:`z` that are typesetted with overbars in printed text represent coordinate values multiplied by -1 and are encoded as :val:`-x`, :val:`-y` and :val:`-z`, respectively.

>   The syntax of the strings representing symmetry operators MUST conform to regular expressions given in appendix `The Symmetry Operation String Regular Expressions`_.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  The syntax of the strings representing symmetry operations MUST conform to regular expressions given in appendix `The Symmetry Operation String Regular Expressions`_.
```

- **Type** list of strings
- **Requirements/Conventions**:

  - **Support**: OPTIONAL support in implementations, i.e., MAY be :val:`null`.
    However, the property is RECOMMENDED if fractional atom coordinates are returned in the response.
    Moreover, the property is REQUIRED if fractional coordinates are returned and no other symmetry information that allows to derive symmetry operations unambiguously (e.g. the Hall symbol) is provided.
    - MUST be null if :property:`nperiodic_dimensions` is equal to 0.
  - **Query**: Support for queries on this property is not required and in fact is NOT RECOMMENDED.

- **Examples**:

  Space group operations for the space group with ITC number 3 (H-M symbol: `P 2`, extended H-M symbol: `P 1 2 1`, Hall symbol `P 2y`):

  - :val:`["x,y,z", "-x,y,-z"]`

  Space group operations for the space group number 5 (H-M symbol `C 2`, extended H-M symbol: `C 1 2 1`, Hall symbol `C 2y`):

  - :val:`["x,y,z", "-x,y,-z", "x+1/2,y+1/2,z", "-x+1/2,y+1/2,-z"]`

> - **Notes** The list of space group symmetry operations applies to the whole periodic array of atoms and together with the lattice translations given in the :property:`lattice\_vectors` property allow to reconstruct all symmetries of the periodic material.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Notes** The list of space group symmetry operations applies to the whole periodic array of atoms and together with the lattice translations given in the :property:`lattice\_vectors` property allows to reconstruct all symmetries of the periodic material.
```

  Thus the symmetry operations described in this property are only applicable to material models with at least one periodic dimension.
  For describing arbitrary symmetries of molecules, non-periodic (finite) collections of atoms or non-crystallographic symmetry, a different property will be used.

- **Bibliographic References for the 'space\_group\_symmetry\_operation\_xyz' definitions**

Bradley, C. J. and Cracknell, A. P. (1972) The Mathematical Theory of Symmetry in Solids. Oxford, Clarendon Press (paperback edition 2010) 745 p. ISBN `978-0-19-958258-7 <https://isbnsearch.org/isbn/9780199582587>`__.

IUCr (2023) Core dictionary (coreCIF) version 2.4.5; data name `\_space\_group\_symop\_operation\_xyz`. Available from: https://www.iucr.org/__data/iucr/cifdic_html/1/cif_core.dic/Ispace_group_symop_operation_xyz.html [Accessed 2023-06-18T16:46+03:00].

space\_group\_symbol\_Hall
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

- **Description**: A Hall space group symbol representing the symmetry of the structure as defined in (Hall, 1981, 1981a).

>   The change-of-basis operators are used as defined in the International Tables of Crystallography (ITC) Vol. B, Sect. 1.4, Appendix A1.4.2 (IUCr, 2001).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  The change-of-basis operations are used as defined in the International Tables of Crystallography (ITC) Vol. B, Sect. 1.4, Appendix A1.4.2 (IUCr, 2001).
```

  - :val:`[[4.0,0.0,0.0],[0.0,4.0,0.0],[0.0,1.0,4.0]]` represents a cell, where the first vector is :val:`(4, 0, 0)`, i.e., a vector aligned along the :val:`x` axis of length 4 Å; the second vector is :val:`(0, 4, 0)`; and the third vector is :val:`(0, 1, 4)`.

space\_group\_symmetry\_operation\_xyz
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

- **Description**: a list of symmetry operations given as general position x, y and z coordinates in algebraic form.
  Each symmetry operation is described by a string that gives that symmetry operation in Jones' faithful representation (Bradley & Cracknell, 1972: pp. 35-37), adapted for computer string notation.
  The letters :val:`x`, :val:`y` and :val:`z` that are typesetted with overbars in printed text represent coordinate values multiplied by -1 and are encoded as :val:`-x`, :val:`-y` and :val:`-z`, respectively.
  The syntax of the strings representing symmetry operators MUST conform to regular expressions given in appendix `The Symmetry Operation String Regular Expressions`_.

>   The interpretation of the strings MUST follow the conventions of the IUCr CIF core dictionary (IUCr, 2023).

Reviewer 2: I would suggest adding a hyperlink to the CIF Core dictionary here directly instead of putting it in references.

Author: Hmm, the link looks long if spelled out in the text, and will not be available in printed PDF if we just "hide" it under the text. Giving full bibliography references to Web pages seems to me like a good practice, since it gives all information, including the access times, titles, authorship and publication date or year. It is endorsed by most recommendations of the Harvard citation style (say, by [ICL](https://www.imperial.ac.uk/media/imperial-college/administration-and-support-services/library/public/Harvard-guide-2022.pdf) or [Himmelfarb Health Sciences Library](https://guides.himmelfarb.gwu.edu/harvard_citation/all-examples)].

Reviewer 2: The specification does not seem to use explicit links anywhere else, thus it seems it was not written to be used in printed form anyway.

Author: Making Web citations in a proper way, as bibliography references, makes a lot of sense to me.

Reviewer 2: Yes, I am fine with this.

>   In particular, this property MUST explicitly provide all symmetry operations needed to generate all the atoms in the unit cell from the atoms in the asymmetric unit, for the setting used.

Reviewer 2: Correct me if I am wrong, but the number of symmetry operators needed to generate all atom positions is less or equal to the group (in math sense) of symmetry operators. The current intention seems to not require the full group, just the site-renegerating subset, right?

Author: If we have just atoms in the asymmetric unit, then *all* symmetry operators (including the identity) must be applied to all atoms to get the full unit cell. Thus, all group operators must be provided, and each operator must be provided just once (maybe this latter point needs to be stressed specially).

The intention is to have the same rules as in the [`_space_group_symop_operation_xyz`](https://www.iucr.org/__data/iucr/cifdic_html/1/cif_core.dic/Ispace_group_symop_operation_xyz.html) definition.

Reviewer 2: Right, I am OK with having the same rules as in CIF core dictionary.

>   The identity operation :val:`x,y,z` MUST be always present.

Author: I am not sure if the new form is better. I did not intend the emphasis it carries in my understanding.

  The letters :val:`x`, :val:`y` and :val:`z` that are typesetted with overbars in printed text represent coordinate values multiplied by -1 and are encoded as :val:`-x`, :val:`-y` and :val:`-z`, respectively.
  The syntax of the strings representing symmetry operations MUST conform to regular expressions given in appendix `The Symmetry Operation String Regular Expressions`_.
  The interpretation of the strings MUST follow the conventions of the IUCr CIF core dictionary (IUCr, 2023).
  In particular, this property MUST explicitly provide all symmetry operations needed to generate all the atoms in the unit cell from the atoms in the asymmetric unit, for the setting used.
  The identity operation :val:`x,y,z` MUST be always present.
  The symmetry operations are to be applied to fractional atom coordinates.
  If the symmetry operation list is present, it MUST be compatible with other space group specifications (the ITC space group number, the Hall symbol, the Hermann-Mauguin symbol and other space group designations) if these are present.
- **Type** list of strings
- **Requirements/Conventions**:

  - **Support**: OPTIONAL support in implementations, i.e., MAY be :val:`null`.

>     However, the property is RECOMMENDED if fractional atom coordinates are returned in the response.

Reviewer 2: Fractional coordinates have not been included in the specification yet (#206).

Reviewer 2: I must have accidentally deleted the branch from which #206 was proposed, but there have been calls to rewrite it anyway. I hope I can do that in a week.

Author: > I must have accidentally deleted the branch from which #206 was proposed,

Oh gosh... That's Git, folks...

But can't you just fetch the PR file from the GitHub server?

Reviewer 2: Yes, I can download the diff and apply it on the parent commit. I will see if I can find that without bisecting the commit history.

Reviewer 3: Wasn't the idea that the present PR should include all the fields described here: https://github.com/Materials-Consortia/OPTIMADE/issues/416#issuecomment-1274498513

This includes `asym_fractional_coords`, which should be the field on which the symmetry operators operate (and probably this field should be mentioned here explicitly).

The old PR that @merkys links to #206 is outdated and was a proposal to include the filled cell fractional coordinates. I think we've agreed we should not have them, only the `asym_fractional_coords`.

    Moreover, the property is REQUIRED if fractional coordinates are returned and no other symmetry information that allows to derive symmetry operations unambiguously (e.g. the Hall symbol) is provided.

>     - MUST be null if :property:`nperiodic_dimensions` is equal to 0.

Author: This is copied from somewhere and should be fixed systematically.

  - **Query**: Support for queries on this property is not required and in fact is NOT RECOMMENDED.

- **Examples**:

  Space group operations for the space group with ITC number 3 (H-M symbol: `P 2`, extended H-M symbol: `P 1 2 1`, Hall symbol `P 2y`):

  - :val:`["x,y,z", "-x,y,-z"]`

  Space group operations for the space group number 5 (H-M symbol `C 2`, extended H-M symbol: `C 1 2 1`, Hall symbol `C 2y`):

  - :val:`["x,y,z", "-x,y,-z", "x+1/2,y+1/2,z", "-x+1/2,y+1/2,-z"]`

- **Notes** The list of space group symmetry operations applies to the whole periodic array of atoms and together with the lattice translations given in the :property:`lattice\_vectors` property allows to reconstruct all symmetries of the periodic material.
  Thus the symmetry operations described in this property are only applicable to material models with at least one periodic dimension.

>   For describing arbitrary symmetries of molecules, non-periodic (finite) collections of atoms or non-crystallographic symmetry, a different property will be used.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  For describing arbitrary symmetries of molecules, non-periodic (finite) collections of atoms or non-crystallographic symmetry, a different property will be defined in future.
```

Author: "will" be already implies "in the future". It can not be used if it is not defined. The main point is that we do not forget to update this place when it is actually defined. My wording is safer in that it will remain (approximately) valid even if we define the new property and forget to fix the description here. I wold leave as is.

Reviewer 2: I read "will" here as "below in this document", thus I would suggest clarifying.

Reviewer 4: Thirded!

- **Bibliographic References for the 'space\_group\_symmetry\_operation\_xyz' definitions**

Bradley, C. J. and Cracknell, A. P. (1972) The Mathematical Theory of Symmetry in Solids. Oxford, Clarendon Press (paperback edition 2010) 745 p. ISBN `978-0-19-958258-7 <https://isbnsearch.org/isbn/9780199582587>`__.

IUCr (2023) Core dictionary (coreCIF) version 2.4.5; data name `\_space\_group\_symop\_operation\_xyz`. Available from: https://www.iucr.org/__data/iucr/cifdic_html/1/cif_core.dic/Ispace_group_symop_operation_xyz.html [Accessed 2023-06-18T16:46+03:00].

> space\_group\_symbol\_Hall

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
space\_group\_symbol\_hall
```
Identifiers cannot contain uppercase letters.

Author: Cant' they? "Hall" is a proper name and should be spelled capitalized.

Author: The same applies to Hermann-Mauguin symbols, BTW.

Reviewer 2: > Cant' they? "Hall" is a proper name and should be spelled capitalized.

Citing the specification:
> **Identifier**
> Names that MUST start with a lowercase letter ([a-z]) or an underscore ("\_") followed by any number of lowercase alphanumerics ([a-z0-9]) and underscores ("\_").

Author: OK, I remember now, we would otherwise have clash with the Filter operator syntax...
Will change.

  - :val:`[[4.0,0.0,0.0],[0.0,4.0,0.0],[0.0,1.0,4.0]]` represents a cell, where the first vector is :val:`(4, 0, 0)`, i.e., a vector aligned along the :val:`x` axis of length 4 Å; the second vector is :val:`(0, 4, 0)`; and the third vector is :val:`(0, 1, 4)`.

> space\_group\_symmetry\_operation\_xyz

Reviewer 3: Symmetry operation or symmetry operation**s**, since this is a list of symmetry operations? I guess the singular form is inspired by the CIF naming (`_space_group_symop_operation_xyz`), but that is a column name, where the CIF standard arguably names columns to specify what is in one cell of the "table".

```suggestion
space\_group\_symmetry\_operations\_xyz
```

Author: The IUCr dictionary uses singular, 'https://www.iucr.org/__data/iucr/cifdic_html/1/cif_core.dic/Ispace_group_symop_operation_xyz.html', and this is where the data name comes from. I wold stick to existing notation that is in wide use and wold not invent a new one.

The motivation for a singular in CIF is that the data item that is named in the data name has exactly one value, and these singular data items are further organized in a loop (or an array/list, if this is a JSON).

> space\_group\_symmetry\_operations\_xyz
> ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
space\_group\_symmetry\_operations\_xyz
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
```

> space\_group\_symmetry\_operations\_xyz
> ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
space\_group\_symmetry\_operations\_xyz
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
```

- **Description**: a list of symmetry operations given as general position x, y and z coordinates in algebraic form.
  Each symmetry operation is described by a string that gives that symmetry operation in Jones' faithful representation (Bradley & Cracknell, 1972: pp. 35-37), adapted for computer string notation.
  The letters :val:`x`, :val:`y` and :val:`z` that are typesetted with overbars in printed text represent coordinate values multiplied by -1 and are encoded as :val:`-x`, :val:`-y` and :val:`-z`, respectively.
  The syntax of the strings representing symmetry operations MUST conform to regular expressions given in appendix `The Symmetry Operation String Regular Expressions`_.
  The interpretation of the strings MUST follow the conventions of the IUCr CIF core dictionary (IUCr, 2023).
  In particular, this property MUST explicitly provide all symmetry operations needed to generate all the atoms in the unit cell from the atoms in the asymmetric unit, for the setting used.

>   The identity operation :val:`x,y,z` MUST be always present.

Reviewer 2: Indentation seems missing in the suggested line. Is this intentional?

>   The identity operation :val:`x,y,z` MUST be always present.

Author: Why longer version?

>   The identity operation :val:`x,y,z` MUST be always present.

Reviewer: @merkys It was indeed missing, fixed.

@sauliusg Well, is unifies the voice between the sentence before it and after it (passive, passive, passive) vs (passive, active, passive) and also specifies that the symmetry operations form a set (i.e. no repeats).

>   The identity operation :val:`x,y,z` MUST be always present.

Author: Agree to the 'set' argument :)

  The symmetry operations are to be applied to fractional atom coordinates.

>   If the symmetry operation list is present, it MUST be compatible with other space group specifications (the ITC space group number, the Hall symbol, the Hermann-Mauguin symbol and other space group designations) if these are present.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  If the symmetry operation list is present, it MUST be compatible with other space group specifications (e.g. the ITC space group number, the Hall symbol, the Hermann-Mauguin symbol) if these are present.
```

- **Type** list of strings
- **Requirements/Conventions**:

  - **Support**: OPTIONAL support in implementations, i.e., MAY be :val:`null`.
    However, the property is RECOMMENDED if fractional atom coordinates are returned in the response.
    Moreover, the property is REQUIRED if fractional coordinates are returned and no other symmetry information that allows to derive symmetry operations unambiguously (e.g. the Hall symbol) is provided.
    - MUST be :val:`null` if :property:`nperiodic_dimensions` is equal to 0.

>   - **Query**: Support for queries on this property is not required and in fact is NOT RECOMMENDED.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - **Query**: Support for queries on this property is not required and is NOT RECOMMENDED.
```

Reviewer: I think that capitalization emphasizes it enough.

Author: Capitalization refers to RFC 2119, not to emphasis in this case (or at least I understand it like that).

Reviewer: I still do not think that the additional emphasis is needed, but I will mark this as resolved to move things forward.

- **Examples**:

>   Space group operations for the space group with ITC number 3 (H-M symbol: `P 2`, extended H-M symbol: `P 1 2 1`, Hall symbol `P 2y`):

Author: "Space group operations" are more specific (not every symmetry operation is a space group (symmetry) operation), and this is important here (only space group (symmetry) operations are provided here); I wold therefore leave this distinction.

  - :val:`["x,y,z", "-x,y,-z"]`

>   Space group operations for the space group number 5 (H-M symbol `C 2`, extended H-M symbol: `C 1 2 1`, Hall symbol `C 2y`):

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  Space group operations for the space group with ITC number 5 (H-M symbol `C 2`, extended H-M symbol: `C 1 2 1`, Hall symbol `C 2y`):
```

Reviewer: Same formulation as in the example before.

>   Space group operations for the space group with ITC number 5 (H-M symbol `C 2`, extended H-M symbol: `C 1 2 1`, Hall symbol `C 2y`):

Author: Same as above...

  - :val:`["x,y,z", "-x,y,-z", "x+1/2,y+1/2,z", "-x+1/2,y+1/2,-z"]`

> - **Notes** The list of space group symmetry operations applies to the whole periodic array of atoms and together with the lattice translations given in the :property:`lattice\_vectors` property allows to reconstruct all symmetries of the periodic material.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- **Notes** The list of space group symmetry operations applies to the whole system and together with the lattice translations given in the :property:`lattice\_vectors` property allows for the reconstruction of all symmetries of the periodic crystal.
```

Author: Is "allow for" a correct verbal phrase here? (https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/allow_for vs https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/allow vs https://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/allow)?

Reviewer 4: Yes, to me at least, "allows to" isn't correct unless you prefer "allows the user/client to"

Author: Fixed as discussed with M.E.

>   Thus the symmetry operations described in this property are only applicable to material models with at least one periodic dimension.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
  Thus, the symmetry operations described in this property are only applicable to material models with at least one periodic dimension.
```

  For describing arbitrary symmetries of molecules, non-periodic (finite) collections of atoms or non-crystallographic symmetry, a different property will be used.

- **Bibliographic References for the 'space\_group\_symmetry\_operation\_xyz' definitions**

> Bradley, C. J. and Cracknell, A. P. (1972) The Mathematical Theory of Symmetry in Solids. Oxford, Clarendon Press (paperback edition 2010) 745 p. ISBN `978-0-19-958258-7 <https://isbnsearch.org/isbn/9780199582587>`__.
> 
> IUCr (2023) Core dictionary (coreCIF) version 2.4.5; data name `\_space\_group\_symop\_operation\_xyz`. Available from: https://www.iucr.org/__data/iucr/cifdic_html/1/cif_core.dic/Ispace_group_symop_operation_xyz.html [Accessed 2023-06-18T16:46+03:00].

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
  Bradley, C. J. and Cracknell, A. P. (1972) The Mathematical Theory of Symmetry in Solids. Oxford, Clarendon Press (paperback edition 2010) 745 p. ISBN `978-0-19-958258-7 <https://isbnsearch.org/isbn/9780199582587>`__.

  IUCr (2023) Core dictionary (coreCIF) version 2.4.5; data name `\_space\_group\_symop\_operation\_xyz`. Available from: https://www.iucr.org/__data/iucr/cifdic_html/1/cif_core.dic/Ispace_group_symop_operation_xyz.html [Accessed 2023-06-18T16:46+03:00].
```

space\_group\_symbol\_hall
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

- **Description**: A Hall space group symbol representing the symmetry of the structure as defined in (Hall, 1981, 1981a).
  The change-of-basis operations are used as defined in the International Tables of Crystallography (ITC) Vol. B, Sect. 1.4, Appendix A1.4.2 (IUCr, 2001).
- **Type**: string
- **Requirements/Conventions**:

  - **Support**: OPTIONAL support in implementations, i.e., MAY be :val:`null`.
  - **Query**: Support for queries on this property is OPTIONAL.
  - Each component of the Hall symbol MUST be separated by a single space symbol.
  - If there exists a standard Hall symbol which represents the symmetry it SHOULD be used.
  - MUST be :val:`null` if :property:`nperiodic_dimensions` is not equal to 3.

- **Examples**:

> Space group symbols with explicit origin (the Hall symbols):

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
  Space group symbols with explicit origin (the Hall symbols):
```

  - :val:`P 2c -2ac`
  - :val:`-I 4bd 2ab 3`

> Space group symbols with change-of-basis operations:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
  Space group symbols with change-of-basis operations:
```

  - :val:`P 2yb (-1/2*x+z,1/2*x,y)`
  - :val:`-I 4 2 (1/2*x+1/2*y,-1/2*x+1/2*y,z)`

> - **Bibliographic References for the 'space\_group\_hall' definitions**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Bibliographic References for the 'space\_group\_symbol\_hall' definitions**
```

> Hall, S. R. (1981) Space-group notation with an explicit origin. Acta Crystallographica Section A, 37, 517-525, International Union of Crystallography (IUCr), DOI: https://doi.org/10.1107/s0567739481001228
> 
> Hall, S. R. (1981a) Space-group notation with an explicit origin; erratum.  Acta Crystallographica Section A, 37, 921-921, International Union of Crystallography (IUCr), DOI: https://doi.org/10.1107/s0567739481001976
> 
> IUCr (2001). International Tables for Crystallography vol. B. Reciprocal Space. Ed. U. Shmueli. 2-nd edition. Dordrecht/Boston/London, Kluwer Academic Publishers.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
  Hall, S. R. (1981) Space-group notation with an explicit origin. Acta Crystallographica Section A, 37, 517-525, International Union of Crystallography (IUCr), DOI: https://doi.org/10.1107/s0567739481001228

  Hall, S. R. (1981a) Space-group notation with an explicit origin; erratum.  Acta Crystallographica Section A, 37, 921-921, International Union of Crystallography (IUCr), DOI: https://doi.org/10.1107/s0567739481001976

  IUCr (2001). International Tables for Crystallography vol. B. Reciprocal Space. Ed. U. Shmueli. 2nd edition. Dordrecht/Boston/London, Kluwer Academic Publishers.
```

> space\_group\_symbol\_hermann\_mauguin
> ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
space\_group\_symbol\_hermann\_mauguin
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
```

- **Description** A human- and machine-readable string containing the short Hermann-Mauguin (H-M) symbol which specifies the space group of the structure in the response.
  The H-M symbols SHOULD be given as specified in the International Tables for Crystallography vol. A (IUCr, 2005), Table 4.3.2.1.

  To encode as character strings, the following adaptations MUST be made when representing H-M symbols given in their typesetted form:

  - the overbar above the numbers MUST be changed to the minus sign in front of the digit (e.g. '-2');
  - subscripts that denote screw axes are written as digits immediately after the axis designator without a space (e.g. 'P 32')
  - the space group generators MUST be separated by a single space (e.g. 'P 21 21 2');

>   - there MUST be NO spaces in the space group generator designation (i.e. use 'P 21/m', not the 'P 21 / m');

Reviewer 2: Agree, to me this looks strange too.

- **Type**: string
- **Requirements/Conventions**:

  - **Support**: OPTIONAL support in implementations, i.e., MAY be :val:`null`.
  - **Query**: Support for queries on this property is OPTIONAL.

- **Examples**

  - :val:`C 2`

>   - :val:`P 21 21 21`

Reviewer 4: Can we also enumerate the possible H-M symbols in this format for easier validation?

Author: I'll have to look at that. I have several lists of H-M symbols, but they are not authoritative. We'd need to cross-check them against the ITC, but this is, as I see at the moment, quite some (manual) work...

Reviewer 4: It's not a blocker for me, so only do it if you agree that it is useful. I can see myself making mistakes implementing this so an exhaustive list to validate against would be great

- **Bibliographic References for the 'space\_group\_symbol\_hermann\_mauguin' definitions**

> IUCr (2005). International Tables for Crystallography vol. A. Space-Group Symmetry. Ed. Theo Hahn. 5-th edition. Dordrecht, Springer.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
  IUCr (2005). International Tables for Crystallography vol. A. Space-Group Symmetry. Ed. Theo Hahn. 5-th edition. Dordrecht, Springer.
```

space\_group\_symbol\_hermann\_mauguin\_extended

> ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
```

- **Description** A human- and machine-readable string containing the extended Hermann-Mauguin (H-M) symbol which specifies the space group of the structure in the response.
  The H-M symbols SHOULD be given as specified in the International Tables for Crystallography vol. A (IUCr, 2005), Table 4.3.2.1.
  The change-of-basis operation SHOULD be provided for unusual settings and cell choices.
  The description of the change-of-basis SHOULD follow conventions of the ITC Vol. B, Sect. 1.4, Appendix A1.4.2 (IUCr, 2001).

>   The same character string encoding conventions MUST be used as for the specification of the `space\_group\_symbol\_hermann\_mauguin`_ property.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  The same character string encoding conventions MUST be used as for the specification of the :property:`space\_group\_symbol\_hermann\_mauguin`_ property.
```

Reviewer: The same change was previously suggested by @merkys, but was no longer properly visible due to the "outdated" status.

- **Type**: string
- **Requirements/Conventions**:

  - **Support**: OPTIONAL support in implementations, i.e., MAY be :val:`null`.
  - **Query**: Support for queries on this property is OPTIONAL.

- **Examples**

  - :val:`C 1 2 1`

- **Bibliographic References for the 'space\_group\_symbol\_hermann\_mauguin\_extended' definitions**

> IUCr (2001). International Tables for Crystallography vol. B. Reciprocal Space. Ed. U. Shmueli. 2-nd edition. Dordrecht/Boston/London, Kluwer Academic Publishers.
> 
> IUCr (2005). International Tables for Crystallography vol. A. Space-Group Symmetry. Ed. Theo Hahn. 5-th edition. Dordrecht, Springer.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
  IUCr (2001). International Tables for Crystallography vol. B. Reciprocal Space. Ed. U. Shmueli. 2-nd edition. Dordrecht/Boston/London, Kluwer Academic Publishers.

  IUCr (2005). International Tables for Crystallography vol. A. Space-Group Symmetry. Ed. Theo Hahn. 5-th edition. Dordrecht, Springer.
```

Author: What is the sense of having spaces here? Does it render differently, or is it just "code beautification"?

Reviewer: @sauliusg Spaces are required for the text to render properly (general level text vs. text under the "- **Bibliographic References for <...>" paragraph).

space\_group\_it\_number
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> - **Description**: Space group number for the structure assigned by the International Tables for Crystallography Vol. A. (IUCr, 2005)

Reviewer: This sentence reads as if the IUCr assigns space group numbers to structures. Would be better to rephrase it.

Author: What about:

"Space group number designated for the space group of the structure by the International Tables for Crystallography Vol. A. (IUCr, 2005)" ?

Author: > "Space group number which specifies the space group of the structure as defined in the International Tables for Crystallography Vol. A. (IUCr, 2005)."

This is how it is written in the current revision, isn't it?

Reviewer: Yes. Probably the conversation was not resolved after making the change.

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

- **Description**: a list of symmetry operations given as general position x, y and z coordinates in algebraic form.
  Each symmetry operation is described by a string that gives that symmetry operation in Jones' faithful representation (Bradley & Cracknell, 1972: pp. 35-37), adapted for computer string notation.
  The letters :val:`x`, :val:`y` and :val:`z` that are typesetted with overbars in printed text represent coordinate values multiplied by -1 and are encoded as :val:`-x`, :val:`-y` and :val:`-z`, respectively.
  The syntax of the strings representing symmetry operations MUST conform to regular expressions given in appendix `The Symmetry Operation String Regular Expressions`_.
  The interpretation of the strings MUST follow the conventions of the IUCr CIF core dictionary (IUCr, 2023).
  In particular, this property MUST explicitly provide all symmetry operations needed to generate all the atoms in the unit cell from the atoms in the asymmetric unit, for the setting used.
  This symmetry operation set MUST always include the :val:`x,y,z` identity operation.
  The symmetry operations are to be applied to fractional atom coordinates.

>   In case only Cartesian coordinates are available, these Cartesian coordinates must be converted to fractional coordinates before application of the provided symmetry operations.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  In case only Cartesian coordinates are available, these Cartesian coordinates must be converted to fractional coordinates before the application of the provided symmetry operations.
```

- **Type** list of strings
- **Requirements/Conventions**:

  - **Support**: OPTIONAL support in implementations, i.e., MAY be :val:`null`.
    However, the property is RECOMMENDED if coordinates are returned in a form to which these operations can and must be applied (e.g. fractional atom coordinates of an asymmetric unit).
    Moreover, the property is REQUIRED if symmetry operations are necessary to reconstruct the full model of the material and no other symmetry information (e.g., the Hall symbol) is provided that would allow the user to derive symmetry operations unambiguously.
    - MUST be :val:`null` if :property:`nperiodic_dimensions` is equal to 0.
  - **Query**: Support for queries on this property is not required and in fact is NOT RECOMMENDED.

- **Examples**:

  Space group operations for the space group with ITC number 3 (H-M symbol: `P 2`, extended H-M symbol: `P 1 2 1`, Hall symbol `P 2y`):

  - :val:`["x,y,z", "-x,y,-z"]`

  Space group operations for the space group with ITC number 5 (H-M symbol `C 2`, extended H-M symbol: `C 1 2 1`, Hall symbol `C 2y`):

  - :val:`["x,y,z", "-x,y,-z", "x+1/2,y+1/2,z", "-x+1/2,y+1/2,-z"]`

> - **Notes** The list of space group symmetry operations applies to the whole periodic array of atoms and together with the lattice translations given in the :property:`lattice\_vectors` property provides all information necessary to reconstruct every symmetry of the periodic material.

Reviewer: Is `reconstruct every symmetry of the periodic material` correct? Maybe there is a noun missing after "symmetry".

Not a blocking issue, feel free to ignore if the usage is correct.

Author: > Is `reconstruct every symmetry of the periodic material` correct? Maybe there is a noun missing after "symmetry".
> 
> Not a blocking issue, feel free to ignore if the usage is correct.

I'm not quite sure what I though back when I wrote this sentence :), but how I read it now is the following: the -x,-y,z+1/2 together with the lattice translations allow us to infer crystal symmetry operations like -x+1,y+1,z-1/2 and so on, in general, all operations of the sort -x+p,-y+q,z+1/2+r, where p,q,r ∈ ℤ.

We could write "provides all information necessary to reconstruct every symmetry equivalent atom of the periodic material", this would be probably more clear but too narrow since symmetry operations are applied not only to atoms but to all objects and (abstract Euclidean space) points in the crystal... Shall we sacrifice completes to hopefully get clarity?

Reviewer: My vote is for clarity. :)

- **Examples**:

  Space group symbols with explicit origin (the Hall symbols):

  - :val:`P 2c -2ac`
  - :val:`-I 4bd 2ab 3`

  Space group symbols with change-of-basis operations:

  - :val:`P 2yb (-1/2*x+z,1/2*x,y)`
  - :val:`-I 4 2 (1/2*x+1/2*y,-1/2*x+1/2*y,z)`

- **Bibliographic References for the 'space\_group\_symbol\_hall' definitions**

  Hall, S. R. (1981) Space-group notation with an explicit origin. Acta Crystallographica Section A, 37, 517-525, International Union of Crystallography (IUCr), DOI: https://doi.org/10.1107/s0567739481001228

  Hall, S. R. (1981a) Space-group notation with an explicit origin; erratum.  Acta Crystallographica Section A, 37, 921-921, International Union of Crystallography (IUCr), DOI: https://doi.org/10.1107/s0567739481001976

  IUCr (2001). International Tables for Crystallography vol. B. Reciprocal Space. Ed. U. Shmueli. 2-nd edition. Dordrecht/Boston/London, Kluwer Academic Publishers.

space\_group\_symbol\_hermann\_mauguin
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

- **Description** A human- and machine-readable string containing the short Hermann-Mauguin (H-M) symbol which specifies the space group of the structure in the response.

>   The H-M symbols SHOULD be given as specified in the International Tables for Crystallography vol. A (IUCr, 2005), Table 4.3.2.1.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  The H-M symbols SHOULD be given using the short format used in the International Tables for Crystallography vol. A (IUCr, 2005), Table 4.3.2.1 as described in the accompanying text.
  The symbol MAY be a non-standard short H-M symbol.
  The H-M symbol does not unambiguously communicate the axis and origin choice, and the given symbol SHOULD NOT be amended to convey this information.
```

  - the space group generators MUST be separated by a single space (e.g. 'P 21 21 2');
  - there MUST be no spaces in the space group generator designation (i.e. use 'P 21/m', not the 'P 21 / m');

- **Type**: string
- **Requirements/Conventions**:

  - **Support**: OPTIONAL support in implementations, i.e., MAY be :val:`null`.
  - **Query**: Support for queries on this property is OPTIONAL.

- **Examples**

  - :val:`C 2`
  - :val:`P 21 21 21`

- **Bibliographic References for the 'space\_group\_symbol\_hermann\_mauguin' definitions**

  IUCr (2005). International Tables for Crystallography vol. A. Space-Group Symmetry. Ed. Theo Hahn. 5-th edition. Dordrecht, Springer.

space\_group\_symbol\_hermann\_mauguin\_extended
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

- **Description** A human- and machine-readable string containing the extended Hermann-Mauguin (H-M) symbol which specifies the space group of the structure in the response.
  The H-M symbols SHOULD be given as specified in the International Tables for Crystallography vol. A (IUCr, 2005), Table 4.3.2.1.

>   The change-of-basis operation SHOULD be provided for unusual settings and cell choices.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  The change-of-basis operation SHOULD be provided for the non-standard axis and cell choices.
  The extended H-M symbol does not unambiguously communicate the origin choice, and the given symbol SHOULD NOT be amended to convey this information.
```

- **Requirements/Conventions**:

  - **Support**: OPTIONAL support in implementations, i.e., MAY be :val:`null`.
    However, the property is RECOMMENDED if coordinates are returned in a form to which these operations can and must be applied (e.g. fractional atom coordinates of an asymmetric unit).

>     Moreover, the property is REQUIRED symmetry operations are necessary to reconstruct the full model of the material no other symmetry information (e.g., the Hall symbol) is provided that would allow the user to derive symmetry operations unambiguously.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    Moreover, the property is REQUIRED if symmetry operations are necessary to reconstruct the full model of the material and no other symmetry information (e.g., the Hall symbol) is provided that would allow the user to derive symmetry operations unambiguously.
```

- **Examples**:

A space group symbol with explicit origin (the Hall symbol):

  - :val:`P 2c -2ac`
  - :val:`-I 4bd 2ab 3`

> Space group symbols with change-of-basis operators:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Space group symbols with change-of-basis operations:
```

  To encode as character strings, the following adaptations MUST be made when representing H-M symbols given in their typesetted form:

  - the overbar above the numbers MUST be changed to the minus sign in front of the digit (e.g. '-2');
  - subscripts that denote screw axes are written as digits immediately after the axis designator without a space (e.g. 'P 32')
  - the space group generators MUST be separated by a single space (e.g. 'P 21 21 2');
  - there MUST be NO spaces in the space group generator designation (i.e. use 'P 21/m', not the 'P 21 / m');

- **Type**: string
- **Requirements/Conventions**:

  - **Support**: OPTIONAL support in implementations, i.e., MAY be :val:`null`.
  - **Query**: Support for queries on this property is OPTIONAL.

- **Examples**

  - :val:`C 2`
  - :val:`P 21 21 21`

- **Bibliographic References for the 'space\_group\_symbol\_Hermann_Mauguin' definitions**

IUCr (2005). International Tables for Crystallography vol. A. Space-Group Symmetry. Ed. Theo Hahn. 5-th edition. Dordrecht, Springer.

space\_group\_symbol\_Hermann_Mauguin\_extended
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> - **Description** A (human-redable) symbol of the space group containing an extended form of the Hermann-Mauguin (H-M) symbol.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Description** A human-readable symbol of the space group given in the extended form of the Hermann-Mauguin (H-M) notation.
```

Reviewer: There might be a better rewording, but the current phrasing "symbol containing a symbol" sound a bit strange.

Author: > Rewrote differently.

- **Examples**:

Space group symbols with explicit origin (the Hall symbols):

  - :val:`P 2c -2ac`
  - :val:`-I 4bd 2ab 3`

Space group symbols with change-of-basis operations:

  - :val:`P 2yb (-1/2*x+z,1/2*x,y)`
  - :val:`-I 4 2 (1/2*x+1/2*y,-1/2*x+1/2*y,z)`

> - **Bibliographic References for the 'space\_group\_Hall' definitions**

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- **Bibliographic References for the 'space\_group\_symbol\_hall' definitions**
```

Reviewer: This very correct comment was not properly visible due to the "outdated" flag so I resuggested the same fix. Closing this.

Hall, S. R. (1981) Space-group notation with an explicit origin. Acta Crystallographica Section A, 37, 517-525, International Union of Crystallography (IUCr), DOI: https://doi.org/10.1107/s0567739481001228

Hall, S. R. (1981a) Space-group notation with an explicit origin; erratum.  Acta Crystallographica Section A, 37, 921-921, International Union of Crystallography (IUCr), DOI: https://doi.org/10.1107/s0567739481001976

IUCr (2001). International Tables for Crystallography vol. B. Reciprocal Space. Ed. U. Shmueli. 2-nd edition. Dordrecht/Boston/London, Kluwer Academic Publishers.

> space\_group\_symbol\_Hermann_Mauguin

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
space\_group\_symbol\_hermann\_mauguin
```
In addition, I do not think we need to escape underscores anymore, I think this is a relic from some other format used before.

Author: For underscores, I just use the same convention as elsewhere in  the text. If the escaping is indeed not necessary, it should be changed systematically in all text in a separate PR; this PR should not be mixed with the refactoring.

Reviewer 2: Right, this shoud be changed in a PR on its own.

Reviewer: The core issues seems to be resolved. @merkys, do you want to open a separate issue about the removal of the backslash escape characters (e.g. as a reminder)?

Reviewer 2: OK, I am marking this as resolved for now.

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> - **Description** A (human-readable) symbol of the space group containing a short-form of the Hermann-Mauguin (H-M) symbol.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Description** A human-readable symbol of the space group given in the short form of the Hermann-Mauguin (H-M) notation.
```

Reviewer: There might be a better rewording, but the current phrasing "symbol containing a symbol" sound a bit strange.

> - **Description** A human- and machine-readable string containing a short Hermann-Mauguin (H-M) symbol specifying the space group of the structure in the response.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Description** A human- and machine-readable string containing the short Hermann-Mauguin (H-M) symbol which specifies the space group of the structure in the response.
```

  The H-M symbols SHOULD be given as specified in the International Tables for Crystallography vol. A (IUCr, 2005), Table 4.3.2.1.

  To encode as character strings, the following adaptations MUST be made when representing H-M symbols given in their typesetted form:

  - the overbar above the numbers MUST be changed to the minus sign in front of the digit (e.g. '-2');
  - subscripts that denote screw axes are written as digits immediately after the axis designator without a space (e.g. 'P 32')
  - the space group generators MUST be separated by a single space (e.g. 'P 21 21 2');
  - there MUST be NO spaces in the space group generator designation (i.e. use 'P 21/m', not the 'P 21 / m');

- **Type**: string
- **Requirements/Conventions**:

  - **Support**: OPTIONAL support in implementations, i.e., MAY be :val:`null`.
  - **Query**: Support for queries on this property is OPTIONAL.

- **Examples**

  - :val:`C 2`
  - :val:`P 21 21 21`

> - **Bibliographic References for the 'space\_group\_symbol\_Hermann_Mauguin' definitions**

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- **Bibliographic References for the 'space\_group\_symbol\_hermann\_mauguin' definitions**
```

IUCr (2005). International Tables for Crystallography vol. A. Space-Group Symmetry. Ed. Theo Hahn. 5-th edition. Dordrecht, Springer.

> space\_group\_symbol\_Hermann_Mauguin\_extended

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
space\_group\_symbol\_hermann\_mauguin\_extended
```

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> - **Description** A human- and machine-readable string containing a short Hermann-Mauguin (H-M) symbol specifying the space group of the structure in the response.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Description** A human- and machine-readable string containing the extended Hermann-Mauguin (H-M) which specifies the space group of the structure in the response.
```

Reviewer: This should probably be "extended" instead of short?

  The H-M symbols SHOULD be given as specified in the International Tables for Crystallography vol. A (IUCr, 2005), Table 4.3.2.1.
  The change-of-basis operation SHOULD be provided for unusual settings and cell choices.
  The description of the change-of-basis SHOULD follow conventions of the ITC Vol. B, Sect. 1.4, Appendix A1.4.2 (IUCr, 2001).

>   The same character string encoding conventions MUST be used as for the specificatio of the `space\_group\_symbol\_Hermann_Mauguin`_ propeerty.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  The same character string encoding conventions MUST be used as for the specification of the `space\_group\_symbol\_Hermann_Mauguin`_ property.
```

>   The same character string encoding conventions MUST be used as for the specification of the `space\_group\_symbol\_Hermann_Mauguin`_ property.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  The same character string encoding conventions MUST be used as for the specification of the `space\_group\_symbol\_hermann\_mauguin`_ property.
```

Reviewer: Resuggested the change for visibility.

- **Type**: string
- **Requirements/Conventions**:

  - **Support**: OPTIONAL support in implementations, i.e., MAY be :val:`null`.
  - **Query**: Support for queries on this property is OPTIONAL.

- **Examples**

  - :val:`C 1 2 1`

> - **Bibliographic References for the 'space\_group\_symbol\_Hermann_Mauguin\_extended' definitions**

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- **Bibliographic References for the 'space\_group\_symbol\_hermann\_mauguin\_extended' definitions**
```

    #BEGIN ERE strings
    "([^\"]|\\.)*"
    #END ERE strings

The Symmetry Operator Regular Expressions
-----------------------------------------

.. code:: PCRE

    #BEGIN PCRE symop_definitions

    $translations = '1\/2|[12]\/3|[1-3]\/4|[1-5]\/6';

>     $symop_translation_appended = "[-+]? [xyz] ([-+][xyz])? ([-+] ($translations) )?";

Author: Added explanation and links into the description, please have a look.

    $symop_translation_prepended = "[-+]? ($translations) ([-+] [xyz] ([-+][xyz])? )?";

>     $symop_re = "($symop_translation_appended|$symop_translation_prepended)";

Reviewer 2: Fair point. At some point in time canonicalization was preferred, but it seems that [later this requirement was relaxed](https://github.com/Materials-Consortia/OPTIMADE/issues/416#issuecomment-1363208516).

>     $symop_re = "($symop_translation_appended|$symop_translation_prepended)";

Author: I would argue for allowing both notations, to avoid forcing databases (including ours ;) to parse and re-format symmetry operations just to conform an extra-restrictive rule.

The symops are not intended for searching either, and a client will have to parse the strings into matrices anyway; both representations are equally easy to parse.

>     $symop_re = "($symop_translation_appended|$symop_translation_prepended)";

Reviewer: Well, some parsing and reformatting is unavoidable since real life symop values (from CIFs) contain spaces, decimal numeric values (0.5 instead of 1/2) and other irregularities. I would strive for a simpler and more uniform representation from all databases.

>     $symop_re = "($symop_translation_appended|$symop_translation_prepended)";

Author: An important point of distinction: both pre-fraction and pos-fraction notation will result in *exactly* the same symmetry operation matrices; there is no reason to prefer one over the other; thus, it makes sense to leave them both.

This is in contrast to notations that add 1 to translations, for example `-x, -y, z+1/2` vs. `-x, -y, z+5/2`. These two strings will produce *different* matrices, and we will have to specify if they are equivalent and if yes, in what sense. Therefore, we forbid extra unit translations.

>     $symop_re = "($symop_translation_appended|$symop_translation_prepended)";

Reviewer 3: I think the point is that arbitrary spaces, "0.5", etc. are also describing exactly the same symmetry operations, but you have at least decided to canonicalize that far.

As may already be obvious from our discussions in #416, my vote is on the side of as much canonicalization as others are willing to accept. But (as I very much promised @sauliusg :-) ) I'm also happy with approving the PR with as free-text notation as he, and others, think is motivated.

>     $symop_re = "($symop_translation_appended|$symop_translation_prepended)";

Author: > I think the point is that arbitrary spaces, "0.5"

The 0.5 is not accepted because, if we accept that, it would be expected to accept also 0.333333333,  and these are not exact fractions. We then need to specify rounding rules, which wold be an overcomplication, and does not bring anything new or useful. So it is not the same as 'x+1/2' vs '1/2+x'.

>     $symop_re = "($symop_translation_appended|$symop_translation_prepended)";

Author: > ... arbitrary spaces ...

Arbitrary spaces are easy to exclude or include; we could allow them if you wish but that would make REs more complicated. Is it worth the game?

>     $symop_re = "($symop_translation_appended|$symop_translation_prepended)";

Author: > as much canonicalization as others are willing to accept

Too much canonicalization is counterproductive, IMHO, especially if it would force a database to parse their symops into matrices and then serialize again only to satisfy arbitrary standardization decisions (and the choice between 'x+1/2' and '1/2+x', if this is what the discussion is about, is arbitrary and not really necessary for anything).

The symops *SHOULD NOT* be searched and compared as strings; rather, different means should be used for searching and processing symmetries. I think we agreed that symops are not a searchable property, didn't we?

>     $symop_re = "($symop_translation_appended|$symop_translation_prepended)";

Reviewer 3: Well, *I* want to exclude as much as possible, so no.

But, just to clarify; I understood @vaitkus's argument (which I agree with) that there is already a *some* degree of canonicalization going on in the proposed OPTIMADE definition in disallowing spaces and '0.5', which one needs to handle when translating the CIF field `_space_group_symop_operation_xyz`. Hence, it doesn't seem that big of a step to also canonicalize on either the prefix or appended notation.

(But, if you feel strongly for allowing this degree of freedom - and it seems you do - I'm OK with that.)

>     $symop_re = "($symop_translation_appended|$symop_translation_prepended)";

Author: > But, just to clarify; I understood @vaitkus's argument (which I agree with) that there is already a _some_ degree of canonicalization going on in the proposed OPTIMADE definition in disallowing spaces and '0.5', which one needs to handle when translating the CIF field `_space_group_symop_operation_xyz`. Hence, it doesn't seem that big of a step to also canonicalize on either the prefix or appended notation.

If you tell a crystallography (who implemented OPTIMADE) that 'x+1/2' is a correct symop and '1/2+x' is not, the crystallography will answer that you are wrong and you should go learn a bit of crystallography. And she/he will be right. If we instead start arguing that this is a standard which we set up a long while ago, the crystallographer will answer that he/she has better things to do than to get into idiosyncrasies of whatever standard whoever designed. And again he/she will be right. Why do we want to create problems on an even spot be preferring one equivalent representation over the other?

Can one give an example what exactly problem is solved by forbidding 'x+1/2' and requiring '1/2+x', or vice versa?

>     $symop_re = "($symop_translation_appended|$symop_translation_prepended)";

Author: Moreover, there are another such "non-canonicalities", like 'x+y' vs. 'y+x'. You do not want to force choice of these, do you?

    #END PCRE symop_definitions

.. code:: PCRE

    #BEGIN PCRE symops

    ^ # From the beginning of the string...
    ($symop_re)(,$symop_re){2}
    $ # ... match to the very end of the string

>     #END PCRE symops

Author: Examples are provided along with the property definition. Here the property name is mentioned. As far as I see, this is the common way to place examples.

>     #END PCRE symops

Reviewer: Ok.

    "([^\"]|\\.)*"
    #END ERE strings

The Symmetry Operation String Regular Expressions
-------------------------------------------------

> Symmetry operation strings that describe :property:`space_group_symmetry_operation_xyz` property MUST conform to the following regular epxressions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Symmetry operation strings that describe :property:`space_group_symmetry_operation_xyz` property MUST conform to the following regular expressions.
```

    "([^\"]|\\.)*"
    #END ERE strings

The Symmetry Operation String Regular Expressions
-------------------------------------------------

> Symmetry operation strings that describe :property:`space_group_symmetry_operation_xyz` property MUST conform to the following regular expressions.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Symmetry operation strings that comprise the :property:`space_group_symmetry_operation_xyz` property MUST conform to the following regular expressions.
```
